# Lecture 1 

## Introduction 

Course webpage: [EDAN65](https://cs.lth.se/edan65)

Course textbook: available on course website

## Course structure

### Assignments

6 of them, there is however a assignment 0 for freshing up on Unix, Java, JUnit etc.
They are quite heavy, assignment 1 "only" 5h, other 12-15h each.

Go to the lab times, TAs will (or should) note your presence. 

Use [coursegit.cs.lth.se](coursegit.cs.lth.se) see Moodle. 
You are supposed to use several commits per assignment => shows progress.

### Lecture quizzes

Avaiable on Moodle, do it yourself.

### Exercises

Available in the course book.


### Overview

- A1: Regular expressions --> Lexical analyser (scanner)
- A1, A2: Context-free grammar --> Syntactic analyser (parser)
- A3, A4: Attribute grammar --> Semantic analyser 
- A5: Intermediate code generator -- Interpreter (on the heap)
- A6: Target code generator -- machine

---

## Compilers

What is a compiler? 
Ofter translating from a higer level language to a lower level one.

Domain specific languages.

### Traditional compiler

`source code` --> `compiler` --> `assembly code`

### What happens after? 

`assembly code` --> `assembler` --> `object code` + `library object code` --> `linker` --> `executable code` --> `loader`

object code contains global variables.

executable code have absolut adresses for variables.

Memory:
- Activation records = stack 
- Objects = heap

This is true for languages like C and Fortran

#### What about Java?

`A.java` --> `javac compiler` --> `A.class`

`A.class` is a class file, java bytecode.

java viritaul machine (jvm) can: 
 - laod bytecode to the heap 
 - interpret bytecode 
 - compile bytecode into machine code during execution (jit = just in time)
 - optimize the machine code 
 - garbage collect the heap

```java
void m(int a1, int a2) {
    int b = a1 * a2 * 4;
    print(b+3);
}
```

What does the compiler need to do?
- read text 
- parsing the words
- map variables to memory 
- build syntax trees 
- optimize
- verificate that it makes sense (?)
- check types
- class not found

### Inside the compiler
```
-- source text --
Lexical analysis (scanning)
-- tokens --
Syntactic analysis (parsing)
-- AST (abstract syntax tree) --
Semantic analysis
-- Attributed AST --
Intermediate code generation              Front end
-- intermediate code -------------------------------------
optimization                              Middle end 
-- ibterneduate code -------------------------------------
target code generation                    Back end 
-- target code --
```
ends: 
- Front = independane on target language 
- Middel = independane on both
- Back = independane on source language

## LLVM 

Some sort of intermediate layer, several languages compile to the same thing, e.g. java bytecode.

---

## Lexical analysis (scanning)

Source text: 

```
while (k <= n) {
    sum = sum + k;
    k = k + 1;
}
```

The file will look like (lexemes):
```
while (k <= n) {\n    sum = sum + k;\n    k = k + 1;\n}
```

And the scanner will produce tokens:
```
WHILE LPAR ID LE ID RPAR LB ID EQ PLUS ID SC ID EQ ID PLUS INT SC RB
```

Note, that white space is ignored.

Parse tree, matching tokens in a tree.

AST is usually a sub set of the parse tree.

In AST there exists class hierachy.

## Generating the compiler

```
                                                        ----
Regular expressions --> Scanner Generator -->           Lexical analysis (scanning)
                                                        ----
Context free grammar --> Parser generator -->           Syntactic analysis (parsing)
                                                        ----
Attrubute grammar --> Attribute evaluator generator --> Semantic analysis
                                                        ----
                                                        Intermediate code generation
                                                        ---- 
                                                        optimization 
                                                        ----
                                                        target code 
                                                        ----
```

## Errors

Compile time errors
- Lexical analasis: **lexcal error**, text cannot be interpreted as a token
- Syntactic analysis (parsing): **syntactic errors**, tokens in the wrong order
- Semantic analysis: **static-semantic errors**, wrong use of names, types, ...

Runtime errors:
- Code generation --> interpret/machine --> **runtime errors**, null pointer exception,
division by zero,
stack overflow, ...

Other: 
- **logic errors**, Compute the wrong result. 
Not caught by the compiler or the machine.
Normally try to catch using test cases.
Assertions and program verification can also help.

## Example errors

Lexical error: 
```java
int # square(int x) { return x * x; }
```

Syntactic error: 
```java
int double square(int x) { return x * x; }
```

Static-semantic error: 
```java
boolean square(int x) { return x * x; }
```

Runtime error:
```java
int p(int x) { return x / 0; }
```

Logic error:
```java
int square(int x) { return 2 * x; }
```

---

## Summary

- 6 assignments, quite heavy
- A compiler is sort of a translator
- A compiler works like:
```
-- source text --
Lexical analysis (scanning)
-- tokens --
Syntactic analysis (parsing)
-- AST (abstract syntax tree) --
Semantic analysis
-- Attributed AST --
Intermediate code generation              Front end
-- intermediate code -------------------------------------
optimization                              Middle end 
-- ibterneduate code -------------------------------------
target code generation                    Back end 
-- target code --
```
- Ends:
  - Front = independent on target language 
  - Middel = independent on both
  - Back = independent on source language
- LLVM: an (common) intermediante layer such as java bytecode
- Lexical analysis (scanner): goes from code to tokens. 
Tokens are "labels" for different parts of a programming languages, e.g. `(k <= n) == LPAR LE ID ID RPAR`.
- Parse tree: putting tokens in a hierarchy. 
- Abstract syntax tree (AST): used to represent the program inside the compiler, similar to parse tree but it only contains the essentials (often a subset, but not always).
- Errors that can occur: 
  - lexical: text cannot be interpreted as a token
  - syntactic: tokens in the wrong order
  - static-semantic: wrong use of names, tokens, ...
  - runtime: null pointer, division by zero, ...
  - logic: compute the wrong result, "thinking" wrong
